 నాసదీయ సూక్త (ఋగ్వేద ) 
నాస॑దాసీ॒న్నో సదా॑సీత్త॒దానీం॒ నాసీ॒ద్రజో॒ నో వ్యో॑మా ప॒రో యత్ .
కిమావ॑రీవః॒ కుహ॒ కస్య॒ శర్మ॒న్నంభః॒ కిమా॑సీ॒ద్గహ॑నం గభీ॒రం .. 1.. 
 Then even nothingness was not, nor existence,
 There was no air then, nor the heavens beyond it.
 What covered it? Where was it? In whose keeping
 Was there then cosmic water, in depths unfathomed?
న మృ॒త్యురా॑సీద॒మృతం॒ న తర్హి॒ న రాత్ర్యా॒ అహ్న॑ ఆసీత్ప్రకే॒తః .
ఆనీ॑దవా॒తం స్వ॒ధయా॒ తదేకం॒ తస్మా॑ద్ధా॒న్యన్న ప॒రః కిం చ॒నాస॑ .. 2..
  Then there was neither death nor immortality
  nor was there then the torch of night and day.
  The One breathed windlessly and self-sustaining.
  There was that One then, and there was no other.
తమ॑ ఆసీ॒త్తమ॑సా గూ॒ళ్హమగ్రే॑ఽప్రకే॒తం స॑లి॒లం సర్వ॑మా ఇ॒దం .
తు॒చ్ఛ్యేనా॒భ్వపి॑హితం॒ యదాసీ॒త్తప॑స॒స్తన్మ॑హి॒నాజా॑య॒తైకం॑ .. 3..
  At first there was only darkness wrapped in darkness.
  All this was only unillumined water.
  That One which came to be, enclosed in nothing,
  arose at last, born of the power of heat.
కామ॒స్తదగ్రే॒ సమ॑వర్త॒తాధి॒ మన॑సో॒ రేతః॑ ప్రథ॒మం యదాసీ॑త్ .
స॒తో బంధు॒మస॑తి॒ నిర॑విందన్హృ॒ది ప్ర॒తీష్యా॑ క॒వయో॑ మనీ॒షా .. 4..
  In the beginning desire descended on it -
 that was the primal seed, born of the mind.
  The sages who have searched their hearts with wisdom
  know that which is is kin to that which is not.
తి॒ర॒శ్చీనో॒ విత॑తో ర॒శ్మిరే॑షామ॒ధః స్వి॑దా॒సీ3దు॒పరి॑ స్విదాసీ3త్ .
రే॒తో॒ధా ఆ॑సన్మహి॒మాన॑ ఆసన్స్వ॒ధా అ॒వస్తా॒త్ప్రయ॑తిః ప॒రస్తా॑త్ .. 5..
  And they have stretched their cord across the void,
  and know what was above, and what  below.
  Seminal powers made fertile mighty forces.
  Below was strength, and over it was impulse.
కో అ॒ద్ధా వే॑ద॒ క ఇ॒హ ప్ర వో॑చ॒త్కుత॒ ఆజా॑తా॒ కుత॑ ఇ॒యం విసృ॑ష్టిః .
అ॒ర్వాగ్దే॒వా అ॒స్య వి॒సర్జ॑నే॒నాథా॒ కో వే॑ద॒ యత॑ ఆబ॒భూవ॑ .. 6..
  But,  after all, who knows, and who can say
  Whence it all came, and how creation happened?
  the gods themselves are later than creation,
  so who knows truly whence it has arisen?
ఇ॒యం విసృ॑ష్టి॒ర్యత॑ ఆబ॒భూవ॒ యది॑ వా ద॒ధే యది॑ వా॒ న .
యో అ॒స్యాధ్య॑క్షః పర॒మే వ్యో॑మ॒న్సో అం॒గ వే॑ద॒ యది॑ వా॒ న వేద॑ .. 7..
  Whence all creation had its origin,
  he, whether he fashioned it or whether he did not,
  he, who surveys it all from highest heaven,
  he knows - or maybe even he does not know.

This is the famous నాసదీయ సూక్త  the 129-th sUkta of
the 10-th mandala of the Rigveda . It has been translated and
discussed by many scholars and there have been volumes dedicated
to just this one sUkta . The current translation is by A . L.
Basham, from his book entitled ``The Wonder that was India''.

Encoded and proofread by Avinash Sathaye sohum at ms.kyu.edu

