 ఋగ్వేదీయ సంధ్యా వందనం 

.. శ్రీ గురుభ్యో నమః . హరిః ఓం ..

..  ఋగ్వేదీయ ప్రాతః సంధ్యా వందనం  ..

Introduction
============

From time immemorial man has been preparing to face
uncertainties and struggling to overcome difficulties in
life. Broadly speaking the difficulties and conflicts he
faces can be categorised as physical on the one extreme and
spiritual on the other, intervened by various other stages
like ethical, intellectual, emotional, filial, occupational,
professional, societal, national and so on. While enormous
education, training and efforts go into tackling difficulties,
conflicts and uncertainties at the basest physical level
onwards, these are waning with the progression to the noblest
spiritual level. It is towards strengthening in this direction
that man has evolved rituals and faith in that Universal
Power and set out in search thereof. Ideally, man should turn
everything he does into sacred with a view to know himself and
his God and towards this strengthen all his faculties. SandhyA
vandana, worship of Gods three times a day at the junctures
of Night-Morning-afternoon-evening, invoking their blessings
and strength, is one such important activity.

Brahmanas
=========

A Brahmana deserves to be called so only when he
conducts himself in the ways approved in the scriptures
and also performs at least the basic ritual called trikAla
SandhyA-vandana. SandhyA vandana is a daily duty for a Brahmana
after upanayana. It is very auspicious and sacred also. TrikAla
SandhyA vandana means paying obeisance to the Lord, three times
a day, i.e., during sun rise, noon and sun-set. It is called
SandhyA Vandana also because the obeisance is offered at the
junctures of 1. Night and day, 2. morning and afternoon, and
3. Day and night. The first one, prAtaH SandhyA, is performed
when the sun is about to rise and the stars are still aglitter
in the sky. The second one, mAdhyAhnika, is performed during
the noon time. The third one sAyaM sandhyA, is performed just
before the sunset. These junction times are regarded as highly
sacred for this purpose.

Preparation
===========

The basic preparation is to cleanse the body externally.
For prAtaH SandhyA, it will be by means of the morning bath
and for the other two it will be by means of washing the
legs, hands and face. After this, You will wear clean clothes
specially meant for this purpose.  The practice is to wear a
dhoti and a shalya.

Thereafter, quietly sit on either a kR^iShNAjina (deer-skin
seat) or on wooden plaque placed on the floor, in the pooja
room (select some other neat place if pooja room is not
available. While for prAtaH SandhyA you can face either East
or North, for the other two you have necessarily to face
North. Keep readily available minimum three vessels, two
with clean water (one for Achamana and the other for Arghya)
and ladle (spoon) and the third one empty (arghya pAtra).
Also ensure that you have complete privacy during the whole
process and avoid external noises like music systems, TV,
talking to others etc.

You will also take the following steps for prAtaH SandhyA
only. Keep a set of mudras (five metallic stamps with different
shapes explained later) and gopichandana (a special variety of
mud ball). Then, apply gopichandana on your body. Generally,
if available, nirmalya tIrtha (holy remnant water after deva
pooja by self or someone) is used for this purpose. In case
of unavailability of nirmAlya tIrtha i.e. Arghya Water can
also be used.

Start the process invoking the blessings of the Lord by reciting
the following mantras.

శ్రీ లక్ష్మీవేంకటేశాయ నమః ..

శ్రీ గురుభ్యో నమః . పరమ గురుభ్యో నమః ..

శ్రీమదానందతీర్థ భగవత్పాదాచార్య గురుభ్యో నమః ..

శ్రీ వేదవ్యాసాయ నమః ..

హరిః ఓం ..

గోపీచందన పాపఘ్న విష్ణుదేహ సముద్భవ .
చక్రాంకిత నమస్తేఽస్తు ధారణ ముక్తిదో భవ ..

Simultaneously, place a spoon of water (either nirmalya
or Arghya Water) on the left hand palm, take a piece
of gopichandana, rub vigorously and prepare a paste of
gopichandana. Apply this paste at 12 places in the body - one on
forehead, three on abdomen, one on chest, one each on shoulders,
all 4 parts of neck, one on bottom of back-bone just above trunk
and one on top of head. Then, one more is applied on the right
side of the chest.  Some people do also apply a similar final
mark on the left side of the chest, if this is the tradition
that they have been taught as per their sampradAya (custom).
While applying, recite Keshavadi Dwadashanama (explained below),
one nAma each for one application.

The order for applying nAmas are -- on the forehead (keshavAya
namaH), center of abdomen (nArAyaNAya namaH), chest (mAdhavAya
namaH), front portion of neck (govindAya namaH), right side
of abdomen (viShNave namaH), right shoulder (madhusudhanAya
namaH), right side of neck (trivikramAya namaH), left side of
abdomen (vAmanAya namaH), left shoulder (shrIdharAya namaH),
left side of neck (hR^iShIkeshAya namaH), back side (above
tunk) (padmanAbhAya namaH), back side of neck (dAmodarAya
namaH) and on the head, on the chest (shrIvatsAya namaH).
The shapes of the paste applied will be as follows. On the
forehead : one set of vertical parallel lines (first apply the
paste with the forefinger and later run through it with a wet
cloth/finger). On the chest: heart (lotus leaf) shape. On the
shoulder: leaf shape (preferably with a stem).  Elsewhere:  
deepAkAra (burning candle light shape). Concentrate on the
mantra and quickly go through the process of applying the
paste instead of trying to perfect the shapes.

After applying gopichandana, apply mudras as follows in
that order.

chakra mudra: one on right side of eye, five on centre of
abdomen, three on heart, two on right of abdomen, three on
right of chest, two on right shoulder both sides of nAma, two
on right of neck, one on front of neck, one on left shoulder
below the nAma.

shankha mudra - one on left side of eye, one on left of abdomen,
two on left of chest, two on left shoulder both sides of nAma,
two on left of neck, one on right shoulder below the nAma.

gadA mudra - one on forehead, one on left of abdomen, one on
left of chest, two on left shoulder both sides of nAma below
shankha mudra.

padma mudra - two on chest, two on right abdomen, two on right
shoulder both sides of nAma below chakra mudra.

nArAyaNa mudra - one each overlapping on all mudras and nAma.

అపవిత్రః పవిత్రో వా సర్వావస్థాం గతోఽపి వా .
యః స్మరేత్పుండరీకాక్షం సబాహ్యాభ్యంతరః శుచిః ..

(Here one has to sprinkle the water (Arghya Water) for
cleanliness or purity, both internally and externally, to
start the SandhyA vandana )

ఆచమన .................... (1)

ఓం శ్రీ కేశవాయ స్వాహా .
(one has to sip water from Brahma tirtha ('Achamana Water')
(spoon or ladle) three times ..1)

ఓం శ్రీ నారాయణాయ స్వాహా . (....2)

ఓం శ్రీ మాధవాయ స్వాహా .(....3)

ఓం శ్రీ గోవిందాయ నమః .
(wash the right palm from the left palm)

ఓం శ్రీ విష్ణవే నమః  .
(wash the left palm with right palm)

ఓం శ్రీ మధుసూదనాయ నమః .
(touch the upper lip)

ఓం శ్రీ త్రివిక్రమాయ నమః .
(touch the lower lip)

ఓం శ్రీ వామనాయ నమః .
(touch the right cheek)

ఓం శ్రీ శ్రీధరాయ నమః .
(touch the left cheek) (mouth is the seat of Fire God)

ఓం శ్రీ హృషీకేశాయ నమః .
(wash both the hands)

ఓం శ్రీ పద్మనాభాయ నమః .
(touch the feet)

ఓం శ్రీ దామోదరాయ నమః .
(touch the centre of the head with middle finger. Head is
the seat of Paramatma)

ఓం శ్రీ సంకర్షణాయ నమః .
(touch the tip of the nose with the middle finger)

ఓం శ్రీ వాసుదేవాయ నమః .
(touch the right side of the nose with index and thumb
fingers)

ఓం శ్రీ ప్రద్యుమ్నాయ నమః .
(touch the left side of the nose with index and thumb
fingers. Nose is the seat of Vayu)

ఓం శ్రీ అనిరుద్ధాయ నమః .
(touch the right eye with index and middle fingers)

ఓం శ్రీ పురుషోత్తమాయ నమః .
(touch the left eye with index and middle fingers)(eye is
the seat of Sun)

ఓం శ్రీ అధోక్షజాయ నమః .
(touch the right ear with index and fourth fingers)

ఓం శ్రీ నారసింహాయ నమః .
(touch the left ear with index and fourth fingers)(ear is
the seat of Indra)

ఓం శ్రీ అచ్చ్యుతాయ నమః .
(touch the navel portion with index and small fingers. Navel
is the seat of Narayana)

ఓం శ్రీ జనార్దనాయ నమః .
(touch the heart portion with palm of the hand)(also the
seat of Narayana)

ఓం శ్రీ ఉపేంద్రాయ నమః .
(touch the head with the hand)

ఓం శ్రీ హరయే నమః .
(touch the right shoulder with all fingers)

ఓం శ్రీ కృష్ణాయ నమః .
(touch the left shoulder with all fingers)(shoulder is the
seat of Prajapati)

(By touching the respective organs of the body one has to
remember and imagine that these gods are present in these
organs)

ప్రాణాయామః ................... (2)

(This is preamble for Gayatri Awahana i.e. welcome, for this
Sri Hari or ParamAtmA is R^iShi devatA and devI gAyatrI is
Channdassu.  Practice of prANAyAmah cleanses one of impurities
and provides a resurgence of spiritual energy to revitalize
one's sAdhana.

In order to extinguish the sins or effect of base deeds in the
previous night for prAtaH SandhyA this verse is uttered. The
pramAna says that this mantra will destroy all the sins
committed previously or previous night if it is prAtaH SandhyA,
morning if it is mandhyanika SandhyA and it is afternoon till
evening if it is sAyam SandhyA.)

ఓం ప్రణవస్య పరబ్రహ్మ ఋషిః . పరమాత్మా దేవతా .
దేవీ గాయత్రీ ఛందః . ప్రాణాయామే వినియోగః ..

ఓం భూః . ఓం భువః . ఓం స్వః . ఓం మహః . ఓం జనః . ఓం తపః .
ఓం సత్యం . ఓం తత్సవితుర్వరేణ్యం . భర్గో దేవస్య ధీమహి ధీయో యో నః
ప్రచోదయాత్ . ఓం ఆపోజ్యోతీరసోఽమృతం బ్రహ్మ భూర్భువఃస్వరోం ..

(A married man should hold the nose in all His five fingers
while performing this and bachelors and saints/seers should hold
through three fingers i.e.  index, thumb and small fingers. This
prANAyAmaH has three parts to perform and it is called rechaka,
pUraka and kumbhaka. To start with one has to leave the air
from right side of the nose (1 unit of time) that is called
rechaka, secondly one has to inhale the air from left side of
nose (2 units of time) i.e. called pUraka and finally holding
the air for 3 units of time i.e. is called kumbhaka.

Meaning of this mantra is as follows : OM = ParamAtmA who
has all the virtues is to be called OM, bhUH = gunapUrna
(complete virtues or characters), bhuvaH = wealthy and never
become pauper or most prosperous, svaH = always happy, mahaH =
prayed as the best or excellent, janaH = creation of the world
by Him, tapaH = one who has the complete knowledge, satyaM =
one who controls or decides about the liberation.

yaH = this paramAtmA, naH = ours, dhIyaH = mind, prachodayAt
= initiates, tasya = of this paramathmA, savituH = cause of
creation, devasya = special characters, vareNyaM = prayed by
all, bharga = paramAthmA in knowledge form, dhImahi = pray
for Him.

Apo = paramAtmA, jyoti = cause of brightness, rasaH = has got
essence or substance or Ananda rUpa peaceful, amR^itaM = does
not have extinction, bhUH = complete virtues or characters,
bhuvaH = prosperous and wealthy always, svaH = always happy,
OM brahma = all virtues of ParamAtmA, dhImahi = praying for You.

The gist of this verse is:  

Sri Hari in the form of Sri Gayatri is complete with all divine
virtues, always prosperous and wealthy, always happy, considered
to be the best or excellent, one who creates this world, one who
regulates this world and one who is being prayed by all of us.

Further, Sri Hari or paramAtmA also has the power of creating
the brightness (enlightenment), does not have extinction,
has complete knowledge, is always prosperous and wealthy and
has got complete virtues, is the paramAtmA (Supreme Being)
whom I am praying.)

సంకల్పః ..................... (3)

(Hold right palm over the left palm and keep them on the
right thigh and utter the following mantra )

శ్రీ శుభే శోభనే ముహూర్తే విష్ణోరాజ్ఞయా ప్రవర్తమానస్య
ఆద్య బ్రహ్మణః ద్వితీయే పరార్ధే శ్రీ శ్వేతవరాహ కల్పే
వైవస్వత మన్వంతరే అష్టావింశతితమే కలియుగే ప్రథమపాదే
జంబూద్వీపే భరతవర్షే భరతఖండే దండకారణ్యే గోదావర్యాః
దక్షిణే పార్శ్వే శాలీవాహనశకే బౌద్ధావతారే రామక్షేత్రే
అస్మిన్వర్తమానేన చాంద్రమానేన అస్య శ్రీ అముక సంవత్సరే
అముక ఆయనే   అముక ఋతౌ   అముక మాసే    అముక పక్షే
అముక తిథౌ    అముక వాసరే    అముక నక్షత్రే   శుభయోగ
శుభకరణ ఏవంగుణ విశేషణ విశిష్టాయాం శుభతిథౌ

అస్మదాదిగురూణాం శ్రీమన్మధ్వాచార్యాణాం హృత్కమలమధ్యనివాసీ
సూర్యాంతర్గత శ్రీ భారతీరమణముఖ్యప్రాణాంతర్గత శ్రీ
లక్ష్మీనారాయణ ప్రేరణయా శ్రీ లక్ష్మీనారాయణ ప్రీత్యర్థం
ప్రాతః సంధ్యాముపాశిష్యే .

(For any prayer or performance of any sacred work whether
it is SandhyA, puja, yagna, or any ritual performed by any
individual this customary sankalpa has to be narrated. It
denotes the commitment and determination of the performer
to rightfully and sincerely perform such sacred rituals.
Here in this sankalpa it is nothing but remembering which
of the samvatsara (year), period or season (R^itau), month
(mAse), the half of lunar month (pakShe), lunar day (tithau),
day (vAsare), star of the day (nakShatre) has to be to according
to the calendar. KAla, i.e. kAladevata is equally God. Even one
has to remember that the prayer is initiated by paramAtmA and
to get His blessings and love, I am performing the respective
ritual.  This is a must as it has been understood that without
this sankalpa the prayer or ritual will not materialise or
not received by the God.

The need for this is to totally concentrate on the present
moment instead of the usual mind's habit of either brooding
over the past or dreaming of the future.)

మార్జనం ....................... (4)

(Keep a spoon or ladle of water (Arghya Water) in the left
hand and from tulasi or basil leaves sprinkle the water in three
different directions to the organs of the body. Firstly one has
to sprinkle feet, centre of the head and heart, secondly heart,
feet and centre of the head and finally centre of the head,
heart and feet like this one has to sprinkle three ways or
nine times)

ఓం ఆపోహిష్ఠేతి త్ర్యర్చస్య సూక్తస్య . సింధుద్వీప ఋషిః .
అపో దేవతా గాయత్రీ ఛందః . మార్జనే వినియోగః ..   ........ (4.1)

ఓం ఆపోహిష్ఠా మయో భువః . తా న ఊర్జే దధాతన .
మహేరణాయ చక్షసే . యోవః శివతమో రసః .
తస్య భాజయతే హనః . ఉశతీరివ మాతరః .
తస్మా అరంగ మామవః యస్య క్షయాయ జిన్వథ .
ఆపోజనయథా చ నః ..   ........ (4.2)

(mArjanam means cleansing or scouring. It is again purifying
the body and mind for offering Arghya and chanting Gayatri
mantra.

For R^ik mantras sindhudvIpa is R^iShiH, paramAtmA is devatA
and Gayatri is Chandassu.

Here is the substance of this verse. It is prayer to Water
related devatAs (aqua-Gods).

᳚ Hey, Water related devatAs, You are bestowing on us happiness
by causing the water to flow, and You bless us with grains
and other related needs and also confer on us devotion and
knowledge towards Sri Hari which guides all of us in the path
of liberation. ᳚

᳚ Hey, Water related devatAs, You are auspicious, You are very
eminent, You are bestowing on us happiness and joy and confer on
all of us love like mothers feeding and protecting their newborn
kids. In order to destroy the sins which we have committed and
also to acquire knowledge we are praying Sri Narayana who is
omnipresent in the water and whom we are praying to bless us to
lead a happy life and also to liberate us at the earliest. ᳚ )

జలాభిమంత్రణం ...................... (5)

(While uttering this, take a spoon of water (Arghya Water)
and sip it after completing the following portion)

సూర్యశ్చేత్యస్య మంత్రస్య . నారాయణ ఋషిః .
సూర్యమామన్యు మన్యుపతయో రాత్రిర్దేవతా .
ప్రకృతిశ్ఛందః . జలాభిమంత్రణే వినియోగః ..   ........ (5.1)

ఓం .. సూర్యశ్చమామన్యుశ్చమన్యుపతయశ్చ మన్యుకృతేభ్యః .
పాపేభ్యోరక్షంతాం . యద్రాత్ర్యా పాపమకార్షం .
మనసా వాచా హస్తాభ్యాం . పద్భ్యాముదరేణ శిశ్నా .
రాత్రిస్తదవలుంపతు . యత్కించ దురితం మయి .
ఇదమహం మామమృతయోనౌ సూర్యే జ్యోతిషి జుహోమి స్వాహా ..  ........ (5.2)

(The verse which has started with sUryascha, Narayana is
R^ishi, manyupathi ratri niyamaka durga is devatA and it is
in prakR^iti Chandassu.

᳚ Hey, paramAtmA, You are the one who controls the Sun who is
very bright, You are the one who controls Sri Rudra who is known
for His wildness You protect us from the sins which are caused
by the ferocity and the initiatives of Sri Rudra devatAs. ᳚

᳚ Hey, paramAtmA, please also protect me from not committing
sins like, sins during night times, sins from mind, sins by
mouth or talking or speaking, sins through hands, sins from
feet, sins from belly and sins through the sex organs. If
I commit any sins, ratrI abhimani (related) devatA should
bless me to wipe it off and if any of my sins are over, I
am performing homa (burnt offering) of the same to You i.e.,
Sri Narayana who is shining in the form of Sun . ᳚ )

ఆచమన - (1)

పునర్మార్జనం ....................... (6)

( mantra as described in (4) should be repeated )

ఆపోహిష్ఠేతి నవర్చస్య సూక్తస్య . సింధుద్వీపో అంబరీషో ఋషిః
ఆపోదేవతా . గాయత్రీ ఛందః పంచమీ వర్ధమానా .
సప్తమీ ప్రతిష్ఠా . అంత్యైద్వే అనుష్టభౌ పునర్మార్జనే
వినియోగః .. ........ (6.1)

ఓం ఆపోహిష్ఠా ...........  ఓం ఆపోజనయథా చ నః ..   (4.2)

( Procedure as described in (4) - should be repeated )

ఓం శం నో దేవీరభీష్టయే ఆపో భవంతు పీతయే .
శం యోరభిస్రవంతు నః ..   ........ (6.3)
ఈశానాం వార్యాణాం క్షయంతీశ్చర్షణీనం .
ఆపోయాచామి భేషజం ..    ........ (6.4)
అప్సు మే సోమో అబ్రవీదంతర్విశ్వాని భేశజా .
అగ్నించ విశ్వశంభువం ..    ........ (6.5)
ఆపః పృణీత భేషజం వరూథం తన్వే3మమ .
జ్యోక్చసూర్యందృశే ..    ........ (6.6)
ఇదమాపః ప్రవహత యత్కించదురితం మయి .
యద్వాహమబిదుద్రోహ యద్వాశ్శేప ఉతానృతం ..  ........ (6.7)
ఆపో అద్యాన్వచారిషం రసేన సమగస్మహి .
పయస్వానగ్న ఆగహి తం మా సంసృజ వర్చసా ..  ........ (6.8)
ససృషీస్తదపసో దివానక్తంచ ససృషీః .
వరేణ్యక్రతూరహమా దేవీ రవసే హువే ..  ........ (6.9)

(The first three verses are already dealt in mArjanam para (4).

᳚ Apashabda vAchya Sri ParamAtma, You bless us with the wealth
of needs like drinking water, happiness and good health. ᳚
(6.3)

᳚ Apashabda vAchya Sri ParamAthma, the grains which are grown
through water mainly referring to rice and like food grains,
You are the owner. You confer on us the knowledge of medicine
to destroy sAnsArik troubles for two and four legged animals. ᳚
(6.4)

᳚ There are different medicines in water which can cure many
diseases. Hey, ParamAtma You have manifested in the form of
of water to bless us with the knowledge to understand these
curative medicines. ᳚   (6.5)

᳚ Hey, ParamAtma, bless us with the preventive medicine
i.e. knowledge for all diseases of my body and soul so that
for long time I can visualize You in my life. ᳚  (6.6)

᳚ Hey, ParamAtma, if I have committed any sins, if I have
betrayed anybody and if I have cursed anybody or if I have
mistaken any body please pardon me. ᳚  (6.7)

᳚ Hey, ParamAtma, now I am following Your directions and Your
principles and I am drowning in water, You are like fire in
the water and rescue me and infuse in me Your energies. ᳚  (6.8)

There is a definite relationship between water and Narayana. Sri
Hari is incarnated and is omnipresent in water. Sri Hari
created water-related amruta (knowledge) to lead us towards
liberation. For this purpose He created day and night abhmimani
(related) devatAs. For acquisition of knowledge and protection
of my body (from any diseases) I am welcoming You (Narayana)
to reside in my soul and body.  (6.9))

ఆచమన - (1)

పాపపురుషవిసర్జనం (అఘమర్షణం) ................. (7)

ఓం ఋతంచేత్యస్య సూక్తస్య . అఘమర్షణ ఋషిః .
భావవృత్తో దేవతా . అనుష్టుప్ ఛందః . పాపపురుష విసర్జనే
వినియోగః .. ........... (7.1)

ఓం ఋతం చ సత్యం చాభీద్ధాస్తపసోధ్యజాయత . తతోరాత్ర్యజాయత తతః
సముద్రో అర్ణవః . సముద్రాదర్వావధిసంవత్సరో అజాయత ..

అహో రాత్రాణి విదధద్విశ్వస్య మిషతోవశీ .
సూర్యాచంద్రమసౌ ధాతా యథా పూర్వమకల్పయత్ . దివం చ
పృథివీంచాంతరిక్షమథో స్వః ..  ............ (7.2)

(While uttering this verse take a spoon of water (Arghya
Water) in right-palm then after completing the verse inhale
the water from right side of the nose and exhale the air from
the left side of the nose and pour out the water on the earth
on one's left side.

This verse is from pApaparihari RishiH, satya and bhakti devatA
and anuShTup Chanddassu . You should have the feeling that
in order to extinguish the sins committed you are offering,
symbolically, a spoon full of water.  (7.1)

Before Brahma thought about anything, ParamAtma created truth,
from the same ParamAtma night was born and from the same
ParamAthma ocean was born.

ParamAtma, the supreme head of everything, created the following
in that order: four-headed Brahma, night, day and all kinds
of living beings.

ParamAtma, one who is the cause of creation has created first
the Sun and the moon, then He created heaven, then He created
the universe, then He created the sky and then He created
heavenly bodies.  (7.2))

అర్ఘ్యప్రదానం ......................... (8)

ప్రాణాయామః   (2)

సంకల్ప

ఓం పూర్వోక్త ఏవం గుణ విశేషణ విశిష్టాయాం శుభతిథౌ
సూర్యాంతర్గత శ్రీ భారతీరమణ ముఖ్యప్రాణాంతర్గత
సవితృనామక శ్రీ లక్ష్మీనారాయణ ప్రేరణయా శ్రీ లక్ష్మీనారాయణ
ప్రీత్యర్థం ప్రథః సంధ్యాంగ అర్ఘ్య ప్రధానం కరిష్యే .. ..... (8.1)

ఓం ప్రణవస్య పరబ్రహ్మ ఋషిః . పరమాత్మా దేవతా .
దేవీ గాయత్రీ ఛందః . వ్యాహృతీనాం ప్రజాపతి ఋషిః .
అగ్నివాయుసూర్యా దేవతా . గాయత్ర్యుష్ణిగనుష్టుభః ఛందాంసి .
గాయత్ర్యాః విశ్వామిత్ర ఋషిః . సవితా దేవతా . గాయత్రీ ఛందః
ప్రాతరర్ఘ్యప్రధానే వినియోగః ..  .......... (8.2)

ఓం భూర్భువః స్వః . తత్సవితుర్వరేణ్యం . భర్గో దేవస్య ధీమహి
ధియో యోనః ప్రచోదయాత్ ఓం ..                 (ఇత్యర్ఘ్యం)  ....  (8.3)

(Pratah Arghya should be offered facing the Sun i.e. facing
East, you should be in standing position, seeing the Sun,
both the hands should fold make like cow's face or bowl and
it should be up to your nose's height.

Write this figure (yantra) and words (preferably in devanagari
script) using your small finger in the bowl where arghya
offering water (Arghya Water) has been kept:

                               ఓం
                               / 
                              /   
                        స్వః / వం  భూః
                            / హౄం 
                           /         
                           ఽఽఽఽఽఽఽఽఽఽఽ
                              భువః

There is story behind this offering Arghya : Mandeha's
were powerful AsurAs (demons) and they are devoted to Sri
Brahma. They got a boon from Him that even if they die one
day they should be born the next day. They were trying to
consume the Sun God himself as a result of these Arghyas;
Whenever they were killed, because of Brahma's blessings they
are born the next day. It is believed this process goes on even
now. In order to kill these AsurAs and to protect the Sun God
for illuminating all of us, we have to offer three Arghyas on
each occasion. Three Arghyas are offered as follows: the first
one is to destroy the AsurAs' vehicle, the second to destroy
their weapons and the third to kill them. This story has been
explained in Vishnu Purana of 8th chapter.

If the prescribed time for performing SandhyA has passed,
You have to offer the fourth Arghya as compensation.)

ఓం ప్రతిచ్క్ష్వేత్యస్య మంత్రస్య వసిష్ఠ ఋషిః . ఇంద్రసోమౌ దేవతా .
అనుష్టుప్ ఛందః . అర్ఘ్యాధికారార్థే ఆత్మ సంరక్షణార్థే చ
జపే వినియోగః ..  ........... (8.4)

హరిః ఓం . ప్రతిచక్ష్వ విచక్ష్వేంద్రశ్చ సోమజాగృతం
రక్షోభ్యో వధమస్యతమశనిం యాతు మద్భ్యః ..  ........... (8.5)

అస్య శ్రీ గాయత్రీ శిరసః బ్రహ్మఋషిః . ఆపో దేవతా గాయత్రీ
ఛందః గాయత్ర్యాకర్షణే వినియోగః ..   ........... (8.6)

ఓం ఆపోజ్యోతీరసోఽమృతం బ్రహ్మ భూర్భువఃస్వరోం ..  ....... (8.7)

(For pratichakShva verse VashiShta is R^ishI, Moon and
Indra are devatAs and anuShTup Channadassu. This verse is for
obtaining eligibility and capability for offering Arghya and
protection of the soul.

The presence of Moon and Indra is invoked to watch out AsurAs
see that the later will not spoil the process of performing
SandhyA and prevent the performer realising the benefits
thereof. It is believed that both Sun and Indra are capable
of killing or destroying these AsurAs, who cause impediments
and even destroy the process of performing sacred rituals.
The Lord Indra, the head of devatAs, uses His weapon, Vajrayudha
for the purpose.)

ప్రాయశ్చిత్తార్ఘ్యం  .............. (8.8)

సంధ్యా కాలాతిక్రమదోష ప్రాయశ్చిత్తార్థం చతుర్థార్ఘ్య ప్రదానం
కరిష్యే ..

ఓం భూర్భువఃస్వః . ఓం తత్సవితుర్వరేణ్యం భర్గో దేవస్య ధీమహి .
ధియో యోనః ప్రచోదయాత్ .. ఓం ఆపోజ్యోతీరసోఽమృతం బ్రహ్మ
భూర్భువఃస్వరోం ..              (ఇత్యర్ఘ్యం)

దేవతా తర్పణం  ................... (8.9)

(DevatA tarpaNa should be given to every day. For shukla
pakSha (first half of lunar month) devatA tarpaNa is given
with the first 12 names of Vishnu (keshava etc.) and during
krishna pakSha (second half of lunar month) it is given with
the 12 names starting from sankarshana. The procedure for
giving tarpaNa is: take one ladle full of water from Arghya
Water in left hand and pour it on right hand fingers so that
it falls through the fingers (except thumb) to 'Arghya PAtra'.
This tarpaNa should not be given on ekadashi, gokulAShTami)

(During shukla pakSha)

కేశవం తర్పయామి . నారాయణం తర్పయామి . మాధవం తర్పయామి .
గోవిందం తర్పయామి . విష్ణుం తర్పయామి . మధుసూదనం తర్పయామి .
త్రివిక్రమం తర్పయామి . వామనం తర్పయామి . శ్రీధరం తర్పయామి .
హృషీకేషాం తర్పయామి . పద్మనాభాం తర్పయామి .
దామోదరం తర్పయామి .

(During krishNa pakSha)

సంకర్షణం తర్పయామి . వాసుదేవం తర్పయామి . ప్రద్యుమ్నం తర్పయామి .
అనిరుద్ధం తర్పయామి . పురుషోత్తమం తర్పయామి . అధోక్షజం తర్పయామి .
నారసింహం తర్పయామి . అచ్యుతం తర్పయామి . జనార్దనం తర్పయామి .
ఉపేంద్రం తర్పయామి . హరిం తర్పయామి . శ్రీకృష్ణం తర్పయామి .

(During both shukla pakSha and krishna pakSha)

ఇంద్రం తర్పయామి . అగ్నిం తర్పయామి . యమం తర్పయామి .
నిరృతిం తర్పయామి . వరుణం తర్పయామి . వాయుం తర్పయామి .
కుబేరం తర్పయామి . ఈశానం తర్పయామి . ఆదిత్యం తర్పయామి .
చంద్రం తర్పయామి . కుజం తర్పయామి . బుధం తర్పయామి .
గురుం తర్పయామి . శుక్రం తర్పయామి . శనిం తర్పయామి .
రాహుం తర్పయామి . కేతుం తర్పయామి .

ధ్యాన శ్లోకం  ................... (8.10)

హృదయస్థాతు గాయత్రీ హృద్గుహాముఖనిఃసృతా .
హత్వా హ్యాదిత్థ శత్రూంశ్చ ప్రవిశ్య హృదయం మమ ..

రమాపతిం పూర్ణగుణం ముకుందవ్యాసం చ విజ్ఞాన సహస్రభానుం .
పూర్ణప్రబోధం చ సుతత్త్వ దీపం క్రమాత్ గురూంశ్చ ప్రణమామి
మూర్ధ్నా  ..

భూతోచ్చాటనం ......................... (9)

అపసర్పంత్విత్యస్య మంత్రస్య వామదేవో ఋషిః భూతాని దేవతా,
అనుష్టుప్ ఛందః భూతోచ్చాటనే వినియోగః ..   .......... (9.1)

అపసర్పంతు యే భూతా యే భూతా భువి సంస్థితాః .
ఏ భూతా విఘ్నకర్తారస్తేనశ్యంతు శివాజ్ఞయా ..

అపక్రామంతు యే భూతాః క్రూరాశ్చైవ తు రాక్షసాః .
యశ్చాత్ర నివసంతైవ దేవతా భువి సంతతం .
తేషామప్యవిరోధేన బ్రహ్మ కర్మ సమారభే ..   .............. (9.2)

(This verse is from Vamadevaka namaka ParamAtma, Bhutani
devatA and anuShTup Chandassu.

Meaning : All AsurAs living on this earth should
disappear. Those AsurAs who obstruct good and sacred work
should be destroyed by the orders of Sri Rudra devatA.

It is a prayer to the existing devatAs who are present in
different forms and taking their permission to start the sacred
SandhyA and request or pray to them to destroy all AsurAs,
devils etc. who are obstructing the ritual.)

(Those who have got the upadesha of  tattvanyAsa, mAtR^ikAnyAsa
etc., should do them here. AsanashuddhiH will be a part of
that. After tattvanyAsa and mAtR^ikAnyAsa, do Gayatri Japa
and nArAyaNa aShTakShara mantra japa, follwed by any other
mahA mantra, then again mAtR^ikAnyAsa and tattvanyAsa then
sandhyopasthAnam (which will be posted later) )

ఆసనశుద్ధిః .............................. (10)

నిరస్తః పరావసుః ఇదమహమర్వా వసోః సదనేసీదామి ఆసనే సోమమండలే
కూర్మస్కంధే ఉపవిష్ఠోఽస్మి . పృథ్వీతి మంత్రస్య మేరుపృష్ఠ
ఋషిః . కూర్మో దేవతా . సుతలం ఛందః . ఆసనే వినియోగః ..

అనంతాసనాయ నమః . కూర్మాసనాయ నమః .  .......... (10.1)

పృథివీ త్వయా ధృతా లోకా దేవి త్వం విష్ణునాధృతా . త్వం చ
ధారయ మాం దేవి పవిత్రం కురు చాసనం .. మాం చ పూతం కురుధరే
నతోఽస్మి త్వాం సురేశ్వరి ..  .......... (10.2)

ఓం ఇత్యేకాక్షరం బ్రహ్మ . అగ్నిర్దేవతా బ్రహ్మ ఇత్యార్షం . గాయత్రం
ఛందః . పరమాత్మం సరూపం సాయుజ్యం వినియోగః ..  ........ (10.3)

ఆయత్విత్యస్యమంత్రస్య . వామదేవఋషిః . గాయత్రీ ప్రతిపాద్య
శ్రీ నారాయణో దేవతా . అనుష్టుప్ ఛందః . గాయత్రై ఆవాహనే
వినియోగః ..  ........... (10.4)

ఆయాతు వరదాదేవీ . అక్షరంబ్రహ్మ సమ్మితం . గాయత్రీ ఛందసాం
మాతేదం బ్రహ్మ జుషస్వమే . యదహ్నాత్కురుతేపాపం తదహ్నాత్ప్రతిముచ్చ్యతే .
యద్రాత్రియాత్కురుతేపాపం తద్రాత్రియాత్ప్రతిముచ్చ్యతే .
సర్వవర్ణే మహాదేవి సంధ్యావిద్యే సరస్వతి ..  ........... (10.5)

ఓజోఽసి సహోఽసి బలమసి భ్రాజోఽసి . దేవానాం ధామనామాసి .
విశ్వమసి విశ్వాఉః సర్వమసి సూర్వౌరభిభోరోం ..

గాయత్రీమావాహయామి సావిత్రిమావాహయామి సరస్వతిమావాహయామి
ఛందర్షీనావాహయామి శ్రీయమావాహయామి బలమావాహయామి .. ........... (10.6)

గాయత్ర్యాః గాయత్రీఛందో విశ్వామిత్రఋషిః సవితా దేవతా . ??
అగ్నిర్ముఖం . బ్రహ్మశిరః . విష్ణుఃహృదయం . రుద్రః శిఖా .
పృథివీ యోనిః ప్రాణాపాన వ్యానోదాన సమాన సప్రాణారక్తవర్ణా .
సాంఖ్యాయనసగోత్రా . గాయత్రీ చతుర్వింశత్యక్షరాత్రిపదా
షట్కుక్షిః . పఙ్చశీర్షోపనయనే వినియోగః ..  ........... (10.7)

(Paravasu was killed, I am living in the hearts of
arvahasu. This has been told by Surya (Sun). By reciting
this cut a thread of the cloth worn by you and make two small
pieces. Throw the one on the left hand, on the left side and
keep the other under the seat.

Silently think like this. Earth is like four poles i.e. four
sides (North, South, East and West) having a seat like the
turtle/tortoise (referring to kurma incarnation). I am sitting
on that. ParmAtma is sleeping on top of snake (shesha) bed. I
am bowing to You. I am bowing to Vishnu Kurma (tortoise)
one who is protecting the earth (Brahmanda) from destruction.

For Prithvi verse merupR^iShTha is R^ishi kUrma (tortoise)
is the devatA sutalam is Channdassu. After this, settle on
the seat for chanting Gayatri MantraH.

Prayer to Prithvi i.e. earth. All regions of Loka are covered
by You, Prithvi Namaka Daivi, You are decorated by Vishnu vakya
ParamAtma. Hey, Prithivi, You authorise me by purifying the
seat where I am sitting.  Prithivi, You also purify me. You
are very special and I am bowing You.  By uttering this,
touch the seat and bow to it.

ParamAtma is called as OM; He has got the form of Brahma and
Agni devatA.  Like the same Brahma is R^ishi, Gayatri Chanddassu
and in the form of OM.

'AyAtu' verse is to welcome Gayatri. For this verse Vasudevaka
ParamAthma is R^ishi, Gayatri Pratipadya Narayana is devatA
and it is in anuShTup Channdassu.

᳚ Hey, Wealth bestowing devatA, bless us with Brahma verse
(Gayatri) which is immortal and is considered to be the mother
of all Vedas (Gayatri); Please bless me Para Brahma (Gayatri
verse). By uttering this Gayatri verse all the sins committed
by me in my daily life will be destroyed (extinguished). ᳚

᳚ I am praying to ParamAthma, who is in the form of Saraswathi
who is also SandhyA devatA and knowledge devatA. Please
extinguish, through the night related devatA who is none other
than Sri Hari, all my sins committed in the night. ᳚

This is a prayer to ParamAtma who is in the form of Gayatri. ᳚
Hey, ParamAtma - You are instrumental for everything, You
have all the patience, You have all the powers, You have the
vision, for devatAs You are Sharanya (protecting them), You
are omnipresent, You have complete form, You are controlling
everything, You are instrumental for everybody's life-activities
and enemies are being defeated by Your single word 'OM'. By
all the above things You are being called Paramatma by the
name Gayatri, the same Gayatri I am inviting in my mind
(AhvAna), I am welcoming Savitri, I am welcoming Saraswati,
I am inviting Chhanddassu, R^ishis, Parabrahma, I am inviting
LakShmi and Vayu who is well known for His powers. ᳚

For Gayatri verse, Gayatri is Channdassu, Vishwamitra is R^ishi
and ParamAtma who is called very sacred (savitR^inamaka). This
ParamAtma is in the following form : His appearance is like fire
in His body, His face is like four headed Brahma, He has got
the heart which is covered by the whole universe, He appears
like Rudra, He has the Sankarshana's hair, He is the earth,
He has yoni sthana, He has five vital airs like prANa, apAna,
vyAna, udAna and samAna and He has upa prANa like devadatta,
kurma, kR^ikara, dhananjaya and nAga, His colour appears like
blood and He belongs to sankhyasana gotra. He has been called
in 24 keshava nAmas, His presence is there in all three places
i.e.. earth, vaikuntha and pAtAla, He has covered in all four
regions (i.e. North, South, East and West), He has five heads
like vyakarana, shikSha, kalpa, nirukta and jyotiSha this
Gayatri I am praying and worshipping.)

ప్రాణాయామః - (2)

ఓం ప్రణవస్య ... అమృతం బ్రహ్మ భూర్భువస్వరోం ..

గాయత్రీ జపః .............................. (11)

కరన్యాసః   ............ (11.1)

(By uttering these verses one has to touch the respective organs)

ఓం తత్సవితురంగుష్ఠాభ్యం నమః . (thumb)
ఓం వరేణ్యం తర్జనీభ్యాం నమః . (index finger)
ఓం భర్గో దేవస్య మధ్యమాభ్యాం నమః . (middle finger)
ఓం ధీమహీ అనామికాభ్యాం నమః . (ring finger)
ఓం ధీయో యో నః కనిష్ఠికాభ్యాం నమః . (small finger)
ఓం ప్రచోదయాత్ కరతలకరపృష్ఠాభ్యాం నమః . (front
and back side of the hands)

షడంగన్యాసః  .......... (11.2)

ఓం తత్సవితుర్హృదయాయ నమః . (heart)
ఓం వరేణ్యం శిరసే స్వాహా . (centre portion of the head)
ఓం భర్గోదేవస్య శిఖాయైవౌషట్ . (back portion of the hair of the head)
ఓం ధీమహి కవచాయ హుం . (both shoulders)
ఓం ధీయో యో నః నేత్రాభ్యాం వషట్ . (both eyes)
ఓం ప్రచోదయాత్ అస్త్రాయఫట్ . (clap)
ఓం భూర్భువఃస్వరోం .

ఆగచ్ఛ వరదే దేవీ జపే మే సన్నిధౌ భవ .
గాయంతం త్రాయసే యస్మాద్గాయత్రీ త్వం తతః స్మృతా ..  ....... (11.3)

( ᳚ Hey, Gayatri, You are very special, please come and be
present in me; You are protecting all of us and You are well
known as Gayatri, whom I am praying. ᳚ )

అస్య శ్రీ గాయత్రీమంత్రస్య సవితృనామక శ్రీ లక్ష్మీనారాయణో దేవతా .
శ్రీ లక్ష్మీనారాయణ ప్రసాదసిద్ధ్యర్థే యథాశక్తి జపే వినియోగః ..

ధ్యానం  ................. (11.4)

ధ్యాయేత్సదా సవితృమండలమధ్యవర్తీ నారాయణః సరసిజాసనీవిష్టః .
కేయూరవాన్ మకరకుండలవాన్ కిరీటీ హారీ హిరణ్మయవపుః
ధృతశంఖచక్రః ..

భారతీరమణ ముఖ్యప్రాణాంతర్గత సవితృనామక శ్రీ లక్ష్మీ
నారాయణ ప్రేరణయా సవితృనామక శ్రీ లక్ష్మీనారాయణ ప్రీత్యర్థం
యథాశక్తి గాయత్రీమంత్రజపం కరిష్యే ..

(For this Gayathri verse, Vishwamitra is R^ishi, Sri LakShmi
Narayana is devatA, in order to impress Sri LakShmi Narayana,
and in order to get love and affection from Sri LakShmi Narayana
I am reciting this according to my abilities and capabilities.

While reciting the japa, imagine the following picture of
Sri LakShmi Narayana who is the subject and object of your
prayer. They are :  

Settled in the centre of the Sun, He is sitting in the posture
of a yogi (padmasana), He has been decorated with the ornament
of shoulder, He has worn ear rings, He has put head gear,
He has the necklace, He has the body of hiranya and He has
conch shell and wheel on His both hands. The same Sri LakShmi
Narayna is the subject and object of my prayer. This prayer is
initiated by Sri LakShmi Narayana and I am praying to please
Him and to get love from Him. I am chanting this verse sincerely
according to my abilities and capabilities.

Take note of the following guidelines while reciting Gayatri Japa :  

1. Laughing/Smiling, talking with others, looking here and
there, sitting other than in the posture of yogi, hands
together, allowing the mind to wander, touching the places
which are below the navel portion etc., which are all unholy,
should not be done.

2. Reciting should be with calmness and peace of mind.

3. PrataH SandhyA Gayathri japa can be recited by standing
and facing towards the East till the Sunrise. Later it can be
recited either standing or sitting.  But Madhyanika Gayathri
japa and Sayam SandhyA Gayathri japa should be recited only
sitting.

4. While counting the beads, cover the right hand either by the
left hand or with a cloth and the number of Gayatri mantraH to
be recited should be ten or in geometrical progression thereof
(i.e. 100, 1000 etc.)

5. Pause after every 5 verses.

6. There are three methods of uttering Gayatri verses. One is
by uttering loudly, second is whispering i.e. speaking through
lips without being heard by any body and third silently chanting
in your mind, always dwelling on their meaning. It is believed
that the third method is better than the second and second
one is better than the first.

7. Counting of the Gayatri verses should be done through finger
beads on circular basis in clockwise direction. Start counting
from middle bead of ring finger (1), come down to bottom bead
(2), traverse through bottom (3), middle (4) and top bead (5)
of little finger, top of ring finger (6),
 8. Hands should rest just above the navel during Pratah
 SandhyA, on the
chest during Madhyahnika and on the nose during Sayam SandhyA.

9. Generally, the Gayatri japa should be performed at the same
place where SandhyA is performed.)

గాయత్రీ మంత్రః :  

ఓం భూర్భువః స్వః . తత్సవితుర్వరేణ్యం . భర్గో దేవస్య ధీమహి
ధియో యోనః ప్రచోదయాత్ ఓం ..  ...... (11.5)
                                  (ఇతి 1000, 100, 10 వారం జపేత్.ః)

పునః ప్రాణాయామ కరన్యాస షడంగన్యాస ఋషిఛందసు కృత్వా,
ధ్యానం చ కృత్వా

భగవాన్ సవితృనామక శ్రీ లక్ష్మీ నారాయణప్రేరణయా సవితృనామక
శ్రీ లక్ష్మీనారాయణ ప్రీత్యర్థం ప్రాతస్సంధ్యాంగ శ్రీ గాయత్రీమంత్రజపః
సంపూర్ణః . శ్రీ కృష్ణార్పణమస్తు ..   .............. (11.6)

ప్రాణయామః - (2)

ఓం ప్రణవస్య పరబ్రహ్మ                బ్రహ్మ భూర్భువఃస్వరోం ..

అష్టాక్షరమంత్రః  .................. (11.7)

భారతీరమణ ముఖ్యప్రాణాంతర్గత సవితృనామక శ్రీ లక్ష్మీ
నారాయణ ప్రేరణయా సవితృనామక శ్రీ లక్ష్మీనారాయణ ప్రీత్యర్థం
యథాశక్తి నారాయణ అష్టాక్షరమంత్రం కరిష్యే ..

        .. ఓం ఓం నమో నారాయణాయ ఓం ..

(It is also believed that one should recite nArAyaNa
aShTAkShara mantra after the Gayatri japa. It should be in 1:3
proportion, i.e.for every 10 Gayatri, you should recite 30
narayana aShTAkShara mantra. After reciting that, for every
10 Narayana aShTAkShara MantraH you should offer one Arghya
i.e. in above case you have to offer 3 Arghyas.)

భగవాన్ సవితృనామక శ్రీ లక్ష్మీ నారాయణప్రేరణయా సవితృనామక
శ్రీ లక్ష్మీనారాయణ ప్రీత్యర్థం ప్రాతస్సంధ్యాంగ శ్రీ నారాయణ
అష్టాక్షరమంత్రం సంపూర్ణం . శ్రీ కృష్ణార్పణమస్తు ..  ..... (11.8)

సంధ్యోపస్థానం .......................... (12)

జాతవేదస ఇత్యస్య మంత్రస్య కశ్యప ఋషిః . దుర్గాజాతవేదాగ్నిర్దేవతా .
త్రిష్టుప్ ఛందః సంధ్యోపస్థానే వినియోగః ..

ఓం జాతవేదసే సునవామ సోమమరాతీయతో నిదహాతి వేదః స నః పర్షదతిదుర్గాణి
విశ్వా నావేవ సింధుం దురితాత్యగ్నిః ..  ............... (12.1)

తచ్ఛꣳయోరిత్యస్య శమ్యుర్విశ్వేదేవాః శక్వరీ ఛందః .
శాంతర్థే జపే వినియోగః ..

ఓం తచ్చఙ్యోరావృణీమహే గాతుం యగ్జ్ఞాయ గాతుం యగ్జ్ఞపతయే .
దేవీఃస్వస్తిరస్తునః . స్వస్తిర్మానుష్యేభ్యః .
ఊర్ధ్వం జిగాతు భేషజం . శన్నో అస్తు ద్విపదే శం చతుష్పదే .. .......(12.2)

నమో బ్రహ్మణే ఇత్యస్య మంత్రస్య వామదేవో ఋషిః
లింగోక్త దేవతా . త్రిష్టుప్ ఛందః సంధ్యోపస్థానే వినియోగః ..

ఓం నమో బ్రహ్మణే నమో అస్తవ్గ్నయే నమః పృథివ్యై నమః ఓషధీభ్యః .
నమో వాచే నమో వాచస్పతయే నమో విష్ణవే మహతే కరోమి ..  ..... (12.3)
(ఇతి త్రివారం ప్రదక్షిణం కృత్వా)

(For jATavedasE verse kashyapa is R^ishi, jATadevagni is
devatA, triShTup Channdasu.

It is a prayer to ParamAtma to extinguish the impact of all
our sins. ᳚ Hey, ParamAtma, please solve or extinguish all our
sins like the boats crossing the stormy ocean, here ocean is
like Samsaric hurdles and boat or ship is like You and You
have to take through these difficulties and make us happy.
It is also said that You are the cause of knowledge and I
pray to you confer that knowledge on us to solve our problems
like crushing the somalata (juice) or crushing the enemies or
burning enemies, who come out cause difficulties in our life,
with the knowledge acquired. ᳚  (12.1)

For taChayo verse shamu is R^ishi, vishwa devatA is devatA,
shakwari is channddassu. To take refuge with ParamAtma this
verse is being uttered.

This prayer is for ParamAthma who is in the form of Dhanvanthri
- God for all medicines.

I am praying You to confer on me with all kinds of medicines
which can cure my existing diseases and also bless me with
the preventive medicines for any possible future diseases also.

I am praying to confer on me the determination to perform all
my duties, including the sacred work like yagna (burnt offering)
to attain salvation, with sincerity and dedication

I would like to attain MokSha like any other devatAs by doing
only sAtvik work in my life.

I would like to win over the heart of ParamAtma, who is in the
form of Gayatri and who can bless me to solve or extinguish all
problems in my mundane life and bless me with the remedies and
who keeps all human beings, all animals and all other living
beings happy.  (12.2)

For namo brahmane verse vAma deva is R^ishi, lingothkya devatA
and triShTup Channddassu.

I am bowing to Veda, I am bowing to Fire and related devatAs,
I am bowing to the universe, I am bowing to medicines, I am
bowing to speech related devatA Sri Saraswati, I am bowing
to four headed Brahma and I am bowing to the one who is being
prayed by all and who is omnipresent. (12.3) )

దిశాం దిగీశానాం నమో నమః .......................... (13)
(Bowing to different poles )

ఓం నమః ప్రాచ్యై దిశే యాశ్చ దేవతాః ఏతస్యాం ప్రతివసంతి
ఏతాభ్యశ్చ నమో నమః . (East pole devatA I am bowing
to You)

ఓం నమః దక్షిణాయై దిశే యాశ్చ దేవతాః ఏతస్యాం ప్రతివసంతి
ఏతాభ్యశ్చ నమో నమః . (South....)

ఓం నమః ప్రతీచ్యై దిశే యాశ్చ దేవతాః ఏతస్యాం ప్రతివసంతి
ఏతాభ్యశ్చ నమో నమః . (West....)

ఓం నమః ఉదీచ్యై దిశే యాశ్చ దేవతాః ఏతస్యాం ప్రతివసంతి
ఏతాభ్యశ్చ నమో నమః . (North...)

ఓం నమః ఊర్ధ్వయై దిశే యాశ్చ దేవతాః ఏతస్యాం ప్రతివసంతి
ఏతాభ్యశ్చ నమో నమః . (High rised up height..)

ఓం నమః అధరాయై దిశే యాశ్చ దేవతాః ఏతస్యాం ప్రతివసంతి
ఏతాభ్యశ్చ నమో నమః . (Lower...)

ఓం నమః అంతరిక్షాయై దిశే యాశ్చ దేవతాః ఏతస్యాం ప్రతివసంతి
ఏతాభ్యశ్చ నమో నమః . (Atmosphere or sky....)

ఓం నమః అవాంతరాయై దిశే యాశ్చ దేవతాః ఏతస్యాం ప్రతివసంతి
ఏతాభ్యశ్చ నమో నమః . (Intermediate or subordinate..)

ఓం ఇంద్రాయ నమః . ఓం గాయత్ర్యై నమః .
ఓం అగ్నయే నమః . ఓం సావిత్రయే నమః .
ఓం యమాయ నమః . ఓం సరస్వత్యై నమః .
ఓం నిఋతయే నమః . ఓం సర్వాభ్యోదేవతాభ్యో నమః .
ఓం వరుణాయ నమః . ఓం దేవీభ్యో నమః .
ఓం వాయవే నమః . ఓం ఋషిభ్యో నమః .
ఓం కుబేరాయ నమః . ఓం గురుభ్యో నమః .
ఓం ఈశానాయ నమః . ఓం మునిభ్యో నమః .
ఓం బ్రహ్మణే నమః . ఓం మాతృభ్యో నమః .
ఓం అనంతాయ నమః . ఓం పితృభ్యో నమః .
ఓం సంధ్యాయై నమః . ఓం ఆచార్యేభ్యో నమః .
ఓం కామోకార్షినమో నమః . ఓం మన్యురకార్షినమో నమః ..  ......... (13.1)

( ᳚ Hey,devatAs I am bowing to You, who always create noble
desires and inspire me towards God ᳚ )

ఓం నమో భగవతే వాసుదేవాయ .
యం సదా సర్వభూతాని స్థావరాణి చరాణి చ .
సాయం ప్రాతర్నమస్యతి సా మాం సంధ్యాభిరక్షతు ..  ........... (13.2)

(I am bowing to You, who is said to have six virtues; I am
bowing to Your wealth and I am bowing to Your resources and
I am bowing to the one who is omnipresent. )

᳚ Hey, ParamAtma, You have been called and praised in different
forms as SandhyA namaka, even animals will bow to You during
SandhyA time, i.e. both early morning and evening. Hey,
SandhyA devatA related ParamAthma please protect me. ᳚

᳚ One who is born as Devaki's son, You are loved and liked
by the Brahmins, You have killed the AsurA called Madhu, You
have beautiful eyes, You are omnipresent, You are immortal,
You have sportive qualities, You always do sAtvik work and
bestow beneficial things on cows and brahmins, You have got
complete knowledge, You are the one who has spelt Vedas for
the first time, Hey, ParamAtma I am bowing to You. ᳚ )

సా మాం సంధ్యాభిరక్షతు ఓం నమో నమః
బ్రహ్మణ్యో దేవకీపుత్రో బ్రహ్మణ్యో మధుసూదనః
బ్రహ్మన్యః పుండరీకాక్షో బ్రహ్మణ్యో విష్ణురచ్యుతః ..  .......... (13.3)

నమో బ్రహ్మణ్యదేవాయ గోబ్రాహ్మణహితాయ చ
జగద్ధితాయ కృష్ణాయ గోవిందాయ నమో నమః ..  .......... (13.4)

క్షీరేణ స్నాపితే దేవీ చందనేన విలేపితే
బిల్వపత్రార్చితే దేవీ దుర్గేఽహం శరణం గతః .
శ్రీ దుర్గేహం శరణాగతః ఓం నమో నమః .. ............. (13.5)

( ᳚ Hey, Godess Durga, I take refuge to You. You are sprinkled
or bathed in milk, You have been decorated with sandal paste
and bael tree leaves.  I am bowing to You. ᳚ )

గాయత్ర్యుద్వాసనం ........................... (14)

అస్య గాయత్రీ ఉద్వాసన మంత్రస్య ఇత్యస్య వామదేవఋషిః .
గాయత్రీ దేవతా . అనుష్టుప్ ఛందః . గాయత్ర్యుద్వాసనే వినియోగః ..

ఉత్తమే శిఖరే జాతే భూమ్యాం పర్వతమూర్ధిని .
బ్రాహ్మణేభ్యోభ్యనుజ్ఞాతా గచ్ఛ దేవి యథాసుఖం .
శ్రీగచ్ఛ దేవి యథా సుఖం గచ్ఛతు ఓం నమో నమః ..  ........... (14.1)

సర్వవేదేషు యత్పుణ్యం సర్వతీర్థేశు యత్ఫలం
తత్ఫలం సమవాప్నోతి స్తుత్వా దేవం జనార్దనం .
ఆకాశాత్ పతితం తోయం యథా గచ్ఛతి సాగరం
సర్వదేవ నమస్కారః కేశవం ప్రతిగచ్ఛతి .
శ్రీ కేశవం ప్రతి గచ్ఛతు .. ................. (14.2)

వాసనాద్వాసుదేవోఽసి వాసితం తే జగత్త్రయం
సర్వభూతనివాసోఽసి వాసుదేవ నమోఽస్తుతే .. ................. (14.3)

నమోఽస్త్వనంతాయ సహస్రమూర్తయే
సహస్రపాదాక్షి శిరోరు బాహవే .
సహస్రనామ్నే పురుషాయ శాశ్వతే
సహస్రకోటియుగధారిణే నమః .. ................. (14.4)

(For Gayatri udwasa verse vAmadeva is R^ishi, Gayatri devatA
and anuShTup Channdassu.

I am praying to ParamAtma in the form of Gayatri who is
omnipresent in this universe, including mountains. I am praying
to You to get liberated and I know You will listen and even
obey those who are devoted (brahmins) to You.

I am praying to you, ParamAtma in the form of Gayatri, through
Gayantri mantra as it will confer on me virtues of uttering
complete Vedas, it will confer on me virtues of taking bath
in all holy rivers and I am praying this Mantra to Sri Hari
who will kill or destroy all wicked people.

Just like all rain-water falling on earth ultimately reach
the ocean, all prayers reach Keshava.

I bow to You Sri LakShmi Narayana in the form of Vasudeva. You
have been called Vasudeva because the entire universe has taken
refuge in You or the entire universe is inside You, all three
Lokas are in You, all jivas, living beings and animals have
taken refuge in You and You are protecting them.

You have been called Ananta, I bow to You. Anantha means
You don't have any particular place (You are omnipresent),
limitless and You are replete with divine virtues. You have
incarnated in thousands of forms, You have thousands of feet,
eyes, heads, legs, shoulders and You have been called on in
thousands of names, I bow to You, one who is holding thousand
wheels. You have been called Keshava wherein fire is present
inside You, please make my mind sacred to remember always Your
different forms.)

గోత్రాభివాదనం ......................... (15)

ఓం భద్రం నో అపివాతయ మనః . ఓం శాంతిః శాంతిః శాంతిః ..

సర్వారిష్ట శాంతిరస్తు . సమస్త మంగలావాప్తిరస్తు ..

చతుస్సాగరపర్యంతం గోబ్రాహ్మణేభ్యః శుభం భవతు ..

అముక గోత్ర,    ఋగ్శాఖాధ్యాయి,      శర్మన్ అహంభో
అభివాదయే . అభివాదయామి ..  ................ (15.1)

(myself bowing to You (You should hold the ears from both the
hands i.e.  holding left ear from middle and forefingers of
right hand and holding right ear from middle and forefingers
of left hand, after telling the pravara one should touch
the earth.)

Please confer on me welfare, wealth resources and peace and
destroy all bad things.

Please confer welfare on the cows and brahmins who will be
there across the four oceans.)

సమాపనం .......................... (16)

యస్య స్మృత్యా చ నామోక్త్యా తపస్సంధ్యాక్రియాదిషు .
న్యూనం సంపూర్ణతాం యాతి సద్యో వందే తమచ్యుతం .
మంత్రహీనం క్రియాహీనం భక్తిహీనం రమాపతే .
యత్కృతం తు మయా దేవ పరిపూర్ణం తదస్తు మే .

(By performing penance, SandhyA, karma etc and by remembering
ParamAtma in His different names, His complete virtues and the
One who is immortal, any mistakes committed while performing
the above will be extinguished and the devotee will get complete
benefits of performing the ritual.

᳚ If by any chance if I have committed any mistake while
reciting the Mantras, while performing the SandhyA and while
remembering You, Hey, ParamAthma - who is in the form of Sri
LakShmi Narayana, please pardon me and confer on me the full
benefits of performing this ritual. ᳚ )

అనేన ప్రతఃసంధ్యావందనేన భగవాన్ శ్రీ మన్మధ్వాచార్యాణం
హృత్కమలమధ్యనివాసీ అనంతకల్యాణగుణపరిపూర్ణః క్షీరాబ్ధిశాయీ
నిర్దోషానందాత్మకః భారతీరమణముఖ్యప్రాణాంతర్గత
సవితృనామక శ్రీ లక్ష్మీనారాయణః ప్రీయతాం . ప్రీతో వరదో భవతు .
శ్రీ కృష్ణార్పణమస్తు ..  ................. (16.1)

(Hold the Arghya Water in right hand, chant the above mantra
and after completing the same, pour the water in hand to
Arghya PAtra.

By performing this SandhyA, ParamAtma who is said to have six
virtues and all six resources of wealth, who is residing in
Sri Madhawacharya's heart, who has immense divine virtues,
which is full of virtues, who is sleeping in milky ocean
who does not have any vices and who is omniscient, who is
praised by Bharati and Sri Mukhya Prana (and who is devoted
to Sri LakShmi Narayna), to please You and get Your love I am
performing this and kindly grace me with your blessings.)

ఆచమన - (1)

అచ్చ్యుతాయ నమః . అనంతాయ నమః . గోవిందాయ నమః .
అచ్చ్యుతానంతగోవిందేభ్యోనమః ..  ................. (16.2)

కాయేన వాచా మనసేంద్రియైర్వా బుధ్యాత్మనా వా ప్రకృతిస్వభావాత్ .
కరోమి యద్యత్సకలం పరస్మై నారాయణాయేతి సమర్పయామి ..  ........... (16.3)

(I am offering to Sri Narayana, who is replete with divine
virtues, all my deeds through my body, my mouth, my mind,
my conscience, organs of my body, my perception, my soul and
my natural disposition.)

యదక్షరపదభ్రష్టం మాత్రాహీనం చ యద్భ్వేఅత్ .
తత్సర్వం క్షమ్యతాం దేవ నారాయణ నమోఽస్తు తే ..  ............... (16.4)

ఇతి ఋగ్వేదీయ అశ్వలాయన ప్రాతః సంధ్యావందనం సంపూర్ణం ..

భారతీరమణ ముఖ్యప్రాణాంతర్గత శ్రీ లక్ష్మీ నారాయణాయ
ప్రీయతాం ప్రీయతో వరదో భవతు ..

.. శ్రీ కృష్ణార్పణమస్తు .. శ్రీ మధ్వేశార్పణమస్తు ..

        .. హరిః ఓం ..

        


